To those learning Computer Science:

It's tough. There's no other way to put it. The only way that you will learn
Computer Science is if you have a genuine interest in it. I failed Computer
Science 1 the first time I took it because I just didn't put in the effort
the first time. And I really hate to seem negative about all of this, but
it's the truth. It took me a very long time to fully understand concepts about
Java and Computer Science in general; several years, in fact.

However, failing Computer Science 1 didn't stop me from pursuing an interest in Computer
Science. Outside of class, I looked up examples, I asked questions, I experimented
with code, I wrote my own little programs to perform tasks. I did these things
because I wanted to learn, and I had a genuine interest in learning, and expanding
my knowledge of the universe.

But it's not all that bad. Like everything, it just takes time. I have almost 4
years of Java experience, and all of that experience came from simply sitting
down during quiet time, and just playing with it. It's as simple as that.

By the way, the Internet is an amazing thing. I used several online resources
to learn about Java and Computer Science in general like StackOverflow, GitHub,
HackerRank, and YouTube. StackOverflow is an online community of developers that
ask each other questions, and that's it. GitHub is an online repository hosting
service (free for any and all open-source projects), which many professional
businesses use. HackerRank is a really nice website for developers to
hone their skills. I took their "30 Days of Coding" challenge that they offer and
it basically teaches everything you need to know for Computer Science 1 and
Computer Science 2. And everybody knows what YouTube is. It's Google's awesome
video-hosting website.

And don't be fooled by my confidence. I'm currently (Fall, 2017) taking on my
Senior Project, in which I have chosen to heavily involve Java programming.
In my extracurricular studies trying to teach myself things that aren't
typically taught in Computer Science courses, I'm finding more and more things
about Java that I have never seen before. As I told my professor earlier this
year, "Java is just an endless barrel of new stuff to learn." In case you're
wondering what I'm doing specifically for my project, I'm writing an algorithm
in Java to playback a music file on one thread, and perform Fourier Transform
analysis and GPIO control on another thread; all to be executed on a Raspberry
Pi 3 - Model B. The GPIO pins control a Solid-State relay, which in turn
controls standard 120V@60Hz power to 8 channels of standard U.S. NEMA outlet power.
I call it the "Generic Light Show", the perfect decoration for a Christmas tree!

I hope that you continue to strive to learn and expand your knowledge as I did.
Java isn't that bad. There's a reason it's currently (2017) the most popular
programming language in the world. Just keep at it, spend time with it outside
of class, ask your own questions (a lot of answers are on StackOverflow),
watch YouTube tutorials, experiment for yourself, and you'll do just fine.

Live and learn.


Steven Jennings, Electrical Engineering Technology (grad. 2018)